[blog] gitpod in devops (#248)
gitpod-io/website: src/blog/continuous-dev-environment-in-devops.md

We should automate dev environments, just as we do with continuous integration and automated deployments. When a developer wants to start a task,  on some branch, in some project, she should be able to do so without spending hours of getting into the right environment.

## Disposable Dev Environments
Automating a dev environment means we can recreate it any time. Starting fresh every time will make sure the setup works correctly and that you get a clean state. Since the build and the tests ran through and the dependencies are all fresh, you can be sure that any problems come from your changes. Such a setup makes it super easy to reproduce bugs, as well.

Moreover, a use-once dev environment frees you from cleaning up afterward. You never pollute your local system with any heavy checkouts, builds, databases, and the like.

We have almost 2020 and understand that automating complex systems through code and configuration is vital to recreating complex environments in our continuous deployment pipelines. Now, let's apply those lessons learned to our dev environments.

## Prebuilt Dev Environments

> Often developers think of the various git commits, of being the starting point for a new task. But the git state is just the raw information we are versioning. A full provisioned software project that allows us to code, run, and debug needs. Running compilers, code generators, downloading dependencies, and running tests can take a couple of minutes or even hours.

Reviewer: Sorry, I don't understand this paragraph. 😐

Author: Rewrote it :)

> A proper tool for providing continuous automated dev environments, should, therefore, prepare a state that is complete or what we call ready-to-code.

Reviewer: Actually I still don't quite grasp what a "continuous ... environment" is.

Maybe that should be framed as a new concept early in the article? E.g. with something like:

> The missing link before Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment? Continuous Developer Environments.

Author: Did that.

> In Gitpod, can prebuild your branches, so that you don't have to wait for builds to complete when you want to start coding. I smile every time I start a dev environment and see the following in the terminal:

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
Gitpod prebuilds your branches and Pull Requests continuously, so you can start coding immediately without having to wait for builds to complete. These days I smile every time I start a dev environment, because I see the following in the terminal:
```

![🍌 This task ran as part of a workspace prebuild. 🎉 You just saved 5 minutes of watching your code build.](./continuous-dev-environment-in-devops/prebuilds.png)

## Browser-based Dev Environments?

> "Browser-based? I need professional tools!"

> Yes, I hear you. Until recently, browser-based tools like Cloud9 haven't been as powerful as what we use locally. But times have changed. Today, we can run a VS Code compatible IDE in a browser tab together with complete terminals to dedicated Linux machines. And everything is specially configured for your project.

Reviewer: I'd use a more trivial example than Cloud9, because Cloud9 was already really good (first web IDE with containers, I think) and many of our users loved it and were sad when c9.io shut down.

Or maybe no "like X" example?

Reviewer: Suggestion: "machines" is a bit abstract here, and I find "containers" more concrete

```suggestion
Yes, I hear you. Until recently, browser-based tools haven't been as powerful as what we use locally. But times have changed. Today, we can run a VS Code compatible IDE in a browser tab together with dedicated Linux cloud containers. And everything is specially configured for your project.
```

## But my environment is different than those from my teammates!
Yes, of course, there are personal things like themes keybindings or even one or the other tool. Some developers heavily use command-line tools and have very advanced configurations. Others use particular VS Code extensions that improve their workflow significantly.

> > But why don't you share all that goodness with your team?

Reviewer: 💯

While Gitpod lets you have user-specific settings, we also see an opportunity in sharing the wisdom in the team to build a perfect friction-free setup for everyone. This way, you can share your impressive terminal skills and configuration with your team, and you might learn a new thing or two as well.

## The missing piece in DevOps

> Automated ready-to-code dev environments will become mainstream. The advantages and implications are just too good to be ignored. Everyone who has understood and experienced the benefits of a proper DevOps toolchain should understand how providing dev environments on-demand completes that experience. Ironing out that last area of non-reproducible and very annoying yak-shaving should be high on our todo list as it will improve developer productivity drastically.

Reviewer: I feel like this paragraph should have been the first one, coining the new term `Continuous Developer Environments`.

Author: I have added a paragraph to the top.

## Automated Dev Environments
Automating dev environments is not new and usually focusses on the initial setup, but that doesn't quite cut it. Of course, we all have felt the pain of being on-boarded in a new project, spending the first week figuring out what tools to install and how to configure them correctly. Manually setting up a dev environment is a waste of energy. Surprising that we do such things, given that we developers are usually busy automating everything else in the world.

![disposable dev environments](./continuous-dev-environment-in-devops/gears.jpg)

But it is not only the one-off onboarding I want to discuss. Our projects change over time, and so do our dev environments. Developers are switching between different versions of a project. They, therefore, have to adjust parts of the dev environment accordingly, all the time.

We should automate dev environments using code, just as we do with testing, staging and production environments for continuous deployments.

> > When a developer wants to start a task, on some branch, in some project, she should be able to do so without spending hours of getting into the right environment.

Reviewer: Or remove word

## Disposable Dev Environments

Automating a dev environment means we can recreate it any time. Starting fresh every time will make sure the setup works correctly and that you get a clean state. Since the build and the tests ran through and the dependencies are all fresh, you can be sure that any problems come from your changes. Such a setup makes it super easy to reproduce bugs, as well.

![disposable dev environments](./continuous-dev-environment-in-devops/same-shoes.jpg)

Moreover, a use-once dev environment frees you from cleaning up afterward. You never pollute your local system with any heavy checkouts, dependencies, builds, databases, and the like. Enter zero-waste coding.

It's almost 2020 and we understand that automating complex systems through code and configuration is vital. Now, let's apply those lessons learned to our dev environments.

## Prebuilt Dev Environments - No More Waiting for Builds!

> Initial setups are annoying, but the real time sink is [waiting for builds](/blog/prebuilds). Compilers, generators, downloading dependencies, and running tests need to be executed to initialize your dev environment.

Reviewer: Suggestion

```suggestion
Initial setups are annoying, but the real time sink is [waiting for builds](/blog/prebuilds). Compilers, generators, downloading dependencies, and running tests all need to be executed before you can use your dev environment.
```

Just like CI tools that build your project after you have submitted a change, a continuous dev environment service builds your project **before** you need it. That way you can start on a clean state immediately.

> A tool for providing continuous automated dev environments should prebuild your project, so you don't have to wait.

> Gitpod prebuilds your branches continuously, so that you can start coding immediately without having to wait for builds to complete. Starting a new dev environment and seeing belows output in the terminal makes me smile every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gitpod prebuilds your branches continuously, so that you can start coding immediately without having to wait for builds to complete. Starting a new dev environment and seeing below output in the terminal makes me smile every time:
```
